                                Introduction and Overview



Motivation and introduction: outline I



        The term Information Retrieval (IR)
           ▶ explanation of terms
           ▶ example scenario for an IR system
           ▶ historical view and recent developments


        Tasks for IR systems
        Difference between IR and fact retrieval (search in databases)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   8 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Motivation and introduction: outline II



        Basic process of Information Retrieval
           ▶ Boolean retrieval
           ▶ Vector space model
           ▶ Probabilistic Information Retrieval


        Formulation of an information need
        Presentation and evaluation of search results
        Summary and structure of the course




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   9 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Motivation and introduction




        Topic of Information Retrieval is the search for documents
        Specific form of a search can vary:
           ▶ Which data set is being searched?
           ▶ What types of documents are being searched for?
           ▶ How exactly can the information need be formulated?




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   10 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Examples of IR scenarios



        Search for text content in the World Wide Web
        Search for images in the World Wide Web
        Search within a web presence
        Search in other media types (video, audio, ...)
        Special filter services (Google Alerts, ....)
        Search in a library (one of the roots of IR)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   11 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   12 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   13 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   14 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Library catalog IKMZ




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   15 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Important aspects of IR



        Formulation of the information need
        Interpretation of the content of textual and multimedia documents
        (extraction of semantics)
        Models (representation) behind IR systems
        Issues related to the implementation of IR systems (such as
        algorithms and data structures used)
        IR system assessment issues




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   16 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



The terms data, knowledge and information in information
science (Kuhlen) I




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   17 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



The terms data, knowledge and information in information
science (Kuhlen) II




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   18 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Term “retrieval”:



Merriam-Webster

        locate and bring in
        call to mind again
        get back again
        get and bring back
        recover from storage




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   19 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Tasks for IR systems



        Classification
              ▶   catalogs, patent databases, ...
        Query processing
        Browsing
        Information Filtering
        ...




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   20 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Historical differentiation between DB and IR



        Database users
           ▶ programmer
           ▶ query based on schema
           ▶ interface is application

        Information Retrieval users
           ▶ end user
           ▶ query is vague
           ▶ direct interaction with the system




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   21 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Differentiation between Information Retrieval and Fact
Retrieval




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   22 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Search engine functionality




        Search
        Catalog
        ...




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   23 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Web catalog functionality




                                                                             Manual maintenance
                                                                             Historically per hand
                                                                             with support from
                                                                             algorithmic classification




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval      Lecture in summer semester   24 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Search engine: what lies behind?




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   25 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Information Retrieval as a basis


        Information Retrieval (IR) considers information systems in terms of
        their role in the process of knowledge transfer from human knowledge
        producers to information demanders.




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   26 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview



Outline



    1   Models of Information Retrieval
           1   The Boolean IR model
           2   The Vector Space Model according to Salton
           3   Quality criteria for IR systems
           4   Consideration of content and quality
           5   Content-based image retrieval (CBIR)
    2   Context-based Information Retrieval
    3   Search and the market




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   27 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



1. Models of Information Retrieval

        Aspects:
           ▶ representation of the information need
           ▶ representation of the documents
           ▶ matching
           ▶ implementation




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   28 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



1.1 The Boolean IR Model




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   29 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Implementation: inverted lists

        Main idea:
           ▶   The normal representation is:

                      the document is saved together with all of its words
           ▶ However, a search does not start with the documents, but with the
             words!
           ▶ So, invert the representation:



                       for each word, save all documents that contain this word
           ▶   A list of documents containing this word is managed for each word:

                                                      the inverted list




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   30 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Example: inverted lists




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   31 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Processing of queries
        Motorcycle AND quality:
           ▶ parallel traversing of the associated lists
           ▶ transfer document references existing in both lists into the result list
           ▶ high efficiency due to sorted lists




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   32 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Disadvantages of the Boolean model


        No stemming of the words to a basic form
        No weighting of words in query and representation
           ▶   according to the location of occurrence
           ▶   according to the frequency of occurrence
        No decomposition of compound terms
        Formulation of a query is not easy
        Hardly predictable result size
        No ranking of the result documents




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   33 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



1.2 The Vector Space Model according to Salton




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   34 / 543
                                 Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Description vector for a text document
                     1   Stop word elimination:
                             ▶   remove words that carry no meaning on their
                                 own and occur in almost all texts (and, or,
                                 the, ...)
                     2   Stemming:
                             ▶   tracing all occurring word forms back to their
                                 stem or base (emperors → emperor, ...)
                     3   Synonym/homonym handling:
                             ▶   replace synonyms with preferred form
                     4   Compound words:
                             ▶   break down compound words and/or combine
                                 words to compound words
                     5   Construction of a vector:
                             ▶   individual components stand for occurrence
                                 frequencies of terms (e.g. 1 = history, 2 =
                                 Napoleon, 3 = France, ...)
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   35 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Processing a query




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   36 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Determination of vector components:
The tf · idf formula according to Salton

        t = Number of terms in the vocabulary
        N = Number of documents in the collection
        nk = Number of documents containing term k
        tfdk = Frequency of occurrence of term k in document D




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   37 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



1.3 Quality Criteria for IR Systems



        Which aspects are of importance for the evaluation of an IR system?




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   38 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Evaluation of IR systems


        How to measure the quality of the result?
        Assumption:
           ▶   For a given query, it can be uniquely decided for each object whether it
               is relevant or not.
        Quality of the result
           ▶   How complete is the result?
                   ⋆   portion of relevant documents found in all relevant documents
                   ⋆   50 relevant docs found; 100 relevant docs total ⇒ Recall = 50%
           ▶   How accurate is the result? Does it contain only relevant entries?
                   ⋆   portion of relevant documents in the result set
                   ⋆   50 relevant docs found; 75 docs in result ⇒ Precision = 67%




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   39 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



1.4 Consideration of Content and Quality



        Other criteria:
           ▶ “quality” of the result documents
           ▶ type of article (overview article, specific article, ...)
           ▶ ...

        How to measure the quality?
           ▶   idea (for web engines):
                   ⋆   Many links pointing to a page indicate quality!
                   ⋆   an implementation: PageRank method from Google




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   40 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Calculation of page quality


                                                X         R(q)
               R(p) = ε + (1 − ε) ·                                                   (Recursion!)
                                                       outlinks(q)
                                               (q,p)
        R(p) = PageRank of page p
        ε = Parameter between 0.1 and 0.2
        (q, p) = Pages q with link to page p
        outlinks(q) = Number of outbound links from page q

        Values are calculated in an iterative procedure of 5 to 50 iterations




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   41 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



PageRank problems

        There is no thematic weighting of the links
           ▶   links could be weighted according to the thematic relevance of the
               linking page
        Number of links depends on “age” of a page
        There are numerous other criteria for quality, e.g.:
           ▶ up-to-dateness (e.g. via modification date)
           ▶ availability
           ▶ information content (number of technical terms/words in the text)
           ▶ popularity (e.g. via PageRank or social media “likes”)
           ▶ authority (e.g. via manual assessments)
           ▶ cohesion (density of content → proximity of the terms used)


        How do you account for “quality” and content relevance?



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   42 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Accounting of quality and relevance




        Addition
        Multiplication
        ...




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   43 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Approach: mixing the result (addition)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   44 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



1.5 Content-based Search
        Transfer to other media




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   45 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Description vector for images
        Properties:
           ▶ color
           ▶ texture
           ▶ shape




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   46 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Processing a query




Alternative: object recognition (terms) by CNN



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   47 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Structured MM documents




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   48 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Models of Information Retrieval



Query processing/optimization




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   49 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Context-based Information Retrieval



2. Context-based Information Retrieval



        Idea:
           ▶ Use another source in order to
             concretize the information
             need!
           ▶ Exploit knowledge from the

             context of the user.
           ▶ This knowledge is used to

             derive a more targeted query
             presentation.




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   50 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Context-based Information Retrieval



User model for context information




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   51 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Context-based Information Retrieval



Generic architecture framework




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   52 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Search and the Market



3. Search and the Market




        Idea:
           ▶    Whoever wants to be found should pay for it!
        Problems:
           ▶    Whoever can not/will not pay will not be found!




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   53 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Search and the Market



Once upon a time: open payment per click




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   54 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Search and the Market




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   55 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Search and the Market



You can still find the info




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   56 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Search and the Market



Search for “ERP”




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   57 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Search and the Market



Who pays how much?




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   58 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Search and the Market



Sponsored search today




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   59 / 543
                                Introduction and Overview    Search and the Market



The same with Google




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)          Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   60 / 543
