                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems




        2. Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   61 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems



Outline




    1   Motivation
    2   Precision, Recall and MAP
    3   Discounted Cumulative Gain
    4   TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   62 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems



Which system is better?




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   63 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems



Which variant brings the better result?




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   64 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Motivation



2.1 Motivation



        IR system evaluation goals:
           ▶   comparison between several IR systems
           ▶   IR system design and configuration

        Evaluation of database systems:
           ▶   functionality (partly standardized: e.g. SQL)
           ▶   runtime efficiency and storage space efficiency




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   65 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Motivation



Efficiency vs. Effectiveness


        Efficiency → using resources as sparingly as possible
           ▶ typical in computer science: runtime and memory efficiency
           ▶ “Is that what is being done being done correctly (efficiently)?”
           ▶ comparative consideration of different systems only makes sense in case

             of equivalent or identical results
        Effectiveness → effectiveness means quality of a result in relation to
        the effort expended
           ▶   “Are the right things being executed?”
        Effectiveness thus always aims at a technical solution in which effort
        and benefit are in a favorable relationship to each other.




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   66 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Motivation



Relevance



        When evaluating IR systems, one assumes that, with respect to a
        query q, the document collection falls into two parts:
           ▶   Rq the set of documents relevant to the query
           ▶   and Rq the set of documents not relevant to the query
        This assumption leads to the consequence that an IR system should
        provide exactly Rq .
        One can thus describe the quality of a query result by its deviation
        from Rq .




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   67 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Motivation



Problems of the binary definition of relevance

        The relevance depends on the prior knowledge of the querier!
           ▶ The relevance of certain documents may only be recognized with prior
             knowledge!
           ▶ On the other hand, if necessary, introductory overview articles are only

             interesting for the layman!
        The relevance of documents can depend on each other.
           ▶ For example, the relevance of a document B may become evident only
             after reading document A.
           ▶ Consequence: if A is in the result, B is relevant, otherwise not!

        A binary relevance scale seems to be too simplistic.
           ▶   A multilevel or even a continuous scale would be more realistic.
           ▶   But: It becomes even more difficult to find a generally accepted
               ranking of documents regarding a query!



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester   68 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



2.2 Precision, Recall and MAP

                                                                                          P
                                            relevant              not relevant
              in the result                 a (hits)              b (noise)               a+b
              P in the result
              not                           c (misses)            d (rejected)            c+d
                                            a+c                   b+d                     a+b+c+d

        Recall answers the question: How complete is the answer?
                             a
                  Recall = a+c  = Number   of relevant documents in the result
                                      Total number of relevant documents



        Precision answers the question: How accurate is the answer?
                               a
                  Precision = a+b = Number   of relevant documents in the result
                                      Total number of documents in the result




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   69 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Another representation




                                                                              Rq ∩Res
                                                             Recall =            Rq

                                                                                 Rq ∩Res
                                                             Precision =           Res




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   70 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



The F-Measure




        Combines the two classic measures recall and precision
        Defines weighted harmonic mean of recall and precision
        Often the unweighted variant with α = 0.5 is applied

                                                Precision·Recall
                               F -Measure = (1−α)·Recall+α·Precision




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   71 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



F-Measure




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   72 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Comparison of multiple systems




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   73 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Determination of Recall I



Variants:
  1 Complete relevance assessment of a representative sample

           ▶   problem: proportion of relevant documents is generally very low
           ▶   ⇒ the sample should be very large, which leads to a large effort

                           a
                 Recall = a+c = Number  of relevant documents in the result
                                   Total number of relevant documents




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   74 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Determination of Recall II



    2   Document Source Method
           ▶ choose a random document from the database
           ▶ formulate a question to which this document is relevant
           ▶ check whether the document is actually in the answer

           ▶ average over several documents and queries, the result is a value for

             the recall
           ▶ problem: questions are not “real” user questions




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   75 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Determination of Recall III



    3   Query extension
           ▶ expand the query so that a superset of the original answer set is found
           ▶ e.g. several question formulations from different editors
           ▶ problem: generally, you still only get a subset of the relevant

             documents!
           ▶ consequence: recall estimate will generally be too high!




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   76 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Determination of Recall IV




    4   Exploiting external sources
           ▶ try to determine relevant documents in parallel by using independent
             methods
           ▶ ask the questioner or other professionals what relevant documents they

             know




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   77 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Pooling method




topics represent queries



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   78 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Procedure
        Intellectual evaluation
           ▶   relevant or not relevant
        Statistical evaluation




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   79 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   80 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   81 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   82 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Averaging over multiple queries



Average over m experiments → 2 possibilities:

        1. Macro Assessment (user-oriented approach)
                                 m                              m
                                      ai                    1 P ai
                Recallϕ,u = m1 ·
                                 P
                                   ai +ci   Precision ϕ,u = m ·   ai +bi
                                                i=1                                               i=1
           ▶   all experiments regardless of result size
           ▶   problem occurs when individual queries return empty results
                                                   ai + bi = 0




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   83 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems      Precision, Recall and MAP



Averaging over multiple queries



        2. Micro Assessment (system-oriented approach)
           ▶   queries with a larger result set have more weight
           ▶   sum of all queries considered as “one big query”
                                           m
                                           P                                                m
                                                                                            P
                                                 ai                                             ai
                                   i=1                                          i=1
                     Recallϕ,s = P
                                 m                             Precisionϕ,s = P
                                                                              m
                                              (ai +ci )                                     (ai +bi )
                                        i=1                                            i=1




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)             Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   84 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Example




        Macro Assessment:                                           Micro Assessment:
           ▶ Recall : 41 · (0.14 + 0.15 +                               ▶     Recall : 125/167 = 0.75
             0.87 + 0.22) = 0.35                                        ▶     Precision : 125/226 = 0.55
           ▶ Precision :
             1                                                      “big” query 3 dominates
             4 ·(0.1+0.17+0.6+0.5) = 0.34




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   85 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Recall/Precision for systems with ranking




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   86 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   87 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Precision, Recall and MAP



Important: user viewpoints and actually used metrics


        MAP → system-oriented approach
        But not directly interpretable as user viewpoint

        Check the documents only on the first page:
           ▶   → P@10 or P@5
        Check the documents until the first irrelevant one:
           ▶   good first hits are important
        Discounted Cumulative Gain
           ▶   using the gradual relevance assessment by the user to measure the
               relevance gain caused by a document at a certain position




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester   88 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Discounted Cumulative Gain



2.3 Discounted Cumulative Gain


        Basis: graded relevance from the user, e.g. {0, 1, 2, 3} where 0 means
        irrelevant
        Assumption: highly relevant documents are most useful in terms of
        information gain when they reach a front position
                                                 p
                                                 P   reli
                                 DCGp = rel1 +      log2 i
                                                                              i=2


        reli is user relevance of i-th result document
        log2 1 = 0: avoid division by zero




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester   89 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Discounted Cumulative Gain



Normalized DCG




        DCGp of different runs only comparable after normalization → nDCGp
        Idea: ratio to ideal DCG → IDCGp
        IDCGp: DCGp sorted in descending order of user relevance
                                             DCG
                                  nDCGp = IDCGpp
        Calculate average of nDCGp from different experiments




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester   90 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Discounted Cumulative Gain



Important: Query types


        Navigational
           ▶   search for homepage of company X
        Informational
           ▶ yellow pages requests
           ▶ fact questions (question answering)
           ▶ ad-hoc (search everything on topic X)




        Consequence: different evaluation requirements, especially for
        relevance feedback




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester   91 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Discounted Cumulative Gain



Cranfield Experiment [CMK66]:
6 criteria for the evaluation of IR systems
    1   Recall → ability of the system to find all relevant objects
    2   Precision → ability of the system to present only objects that are
        relevant
    3   Time lag → the time between submitting the query and providing the
        response
    4   Effort → the intellectual and physical effort required by the user to
        obtain the answer (e.g. complex input, queries from the system, ...)
    5   Form of presentation → the quality of the result presentation, which
        influences the usefulness for the user
    6   Coverage of the collection → the degree to which the system contains
        relevant objects (more a question of the documents than the retrieval
        system)

Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester   92 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Discounted Cumulative Gain



Vickery describes 6 criteria, which he divides into two
groups [Vic70]:

        Criteria related to availability of information:
           ▶ Coverage → proportion of potentially useful literature that was
             considered (e.g., if multiple collections were available: were all
             collections considered together with potentially relevant documents)
           ▶ Recall → proportion of potentially useful documents included in the

             result of the query
           ▶ Response time → average response time

        Criteria related to the selectivity of the response:
           ▶ Precision → ability of the system to suppress useless documents
           ▶ Usability → value of the determined documents for the user (reliability,
             comprehensibility, ...)
           ▶ Presentation → form in which the results are presented




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester   93 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Discounted Cumulative Gain



Usability

        Special focus in IR due to user focus
        http://www.searchuserinterfaces.com/




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester   94 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    Discounted Cumulative Gain



Goals of evaluation initiatives




        Uniform evaluation standards for retrieval systems (standardization)
        Enable comparison between systems
        Drive further development of IR systems
        Take up requirements from the community and improve methodology




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester   95 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



2.4 TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives


        TREC: Text REtrieval Conference
        “TREC is a new ballgame for IR research and development” (Sparck
        Jones 1994)
        Evaluation initiative of the National Institute of Standards and
        Technology (NIST) in the USA
        1992: TREC-1 (Proceedings 1993)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   96 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   97 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Procedure



        Test base
           ▶   objects (documents, ...) with clarified copyright
           ▶   queries (Topics)
                   ⋆   relevant information needs for potential users
           ▶   uniform relevance assessment
        Time frame (approx. 4 months in total)
           ▶ query output
           ▶ submitting results
           ▶ announcement of the results




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   98 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



2008 TREC tracks




        Blog track
        Enterprise track
        Legal track
        Million query track
        Relevance feedback track




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester   99 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Further TREC tracks
        Cross-language track
        Filtering track
        Genomics track
        HARD track (high accuracy retrieval from documents)
        Interactive track
        Novelty track
        Question answering track
        Robust retrieval track
        SPAM track
        Terabyte track
        Video track
        Web track

Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 100 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Question answering




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 101 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Sample topic




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 102 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Sample document: Wall Street Journal




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 103 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Relevance evaluation




        Abstraction from the individual user and his context
        Uniform evaluation
        Objective jurors who are not in a use situation
        Objective statement about content relation between topic and
        document




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 104 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Cross-language evaluation forum



Research on cross- and multi-lingual
Information Retrieval systems




EU funding: DELOS NoE for digital
libraries




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 105 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



GeoCLEF Monolingual English




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 106 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Variability




        OBSERVATION: the difference in performance between the systems
        is much smaller than between the topics




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 107 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Example GeoCLEF 2006 (boxplots) I




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 108 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Example GeoCLEF 2006 (boxplots) II




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 109 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Aggregation of multiple queries




        Usually simple arithmetic average




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 110 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Which system is better?




                                           2 systems, 3 queries



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 111 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



“IR Psychology” I



The unhappy customer, on average, will tell 27 other people ...

Dissatisfied customers tell an average of ten other people about their
bad experience. Twelve percent tell up to twenty people.

                                      → Bad news travels fast.

                                                                    Credit to Jacques Savoy for slide




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 112 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



“IR Psychology” II

On the other hand, satisfied customers will tell an average of five people
about their positive experience.

                        → Good news travels somewhat slower.


A site search should work robustly
; bad outliers must be avoided!
     for each query
     for each evaluation criterion

                                                                    Credit to Jacques Savoy for slide




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 113 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



“IR Psychology” III




        Very good results, poor interaction → dissatisfied user
        Very good interaction, poor results → dissatisfied user




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 114 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



GMAP




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 115 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Robustness




        Stable performance over all queries instead of high average
        performance
        “Difficult” queries should have greater weight in the evaluation
        process




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 116 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



NTCIR


        Multilingual retrieval for Asian languages
        Performed in Tokyo
           ▶   National Institute for Informatics
        Tasks
           ▶   cross-lingual
                   ⋆   Chinese, Japanese, Korean → English
           ▶ patent retrieval
           ▶ web retrieval
           ▶ question answering




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 117 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



FIRE



        Evaluation Initiative for Indian Languages
           ▶ Hindi and Bengali (among the 10 most spoken languages in the world)
           ▶ Marathi, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi, Malayalam
           ▶ English




        Newspaper texts
        Running since 2008
        https://www.isical.ac.in/~clia/




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 118 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



INEX




        INitiative for the Evaluation of XML Retrieval
           ▶ evaluation of retrieval with structured documents
           ▶ goal: find the smallest relevant section rather than the entire document
           ▶ exploiting the structure
           ▶ test collection 2005: travel guide

                   ⋆   https://www.is.inf.uni-due.de/projects/inex/index.html




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 119 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



IMIRSEL




        International Music Information Retrieval Systems Evaluation
        Laboratory Project
           ▶   answering questions about pieces of music
        https://www.music-ir.org/mirex/wiki/MIREX_HOME




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 120 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



User?




        The user is never in the role of the evaluator
        Does improving systems in terms of traditional metrics also lead to
        higher user satisfaction?
        Does a good ranking also lead to higher user satisfaction?




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 121 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Problems with user satisfaction I




        No correlation between preference and quality could be detected in
        several image retrieval systems
           ▶   two tasks
           ▶   eleven test subjects

                                                                                         Maskari et al. 2006




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 122 / 543
                   Evaluation and Assessment of IR Systems    TREC and Further Evaluation Initiatives



Problems with user satisfaction II


        For simple search tasks and controlled retrieval quality, there was no
        effect on user performance for a system
           ▶ artificially created systems of different quality (different MAP)
           ▶ as many relevant documents as possible should be found in 5 minutes
           ▶ approx. 20 test subjects


                                                       Turpin & Scholer 2006
        System differences cannot be identified by user testing
           ▶   model for TREC and CLEF is the “dedicated searcher”
                                                                                      Turpin & Hersh 2001




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 123 / 543
