                                      Vagueness in Language




                             3. Vagueness in Language




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 124 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language



Outline



    1   An Introductory Example
    2   Stop Word Elimination
    3   Stem and/or Base Form Reduction
    4   Compound Word Identification                                          ⇒ Depending on the
                                                                           language ⇒ different effort!
    5   Terminological Control
    6   A Language-independent Approach
    7   Marking by means of Metadata




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval      Lecture in summer semester 125 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language



Terminology


        Word
           ▶   strong reference to the ‘string’
           ▶   thus rather refers to the syntactic level
        Term
           ▶   addresses more strongly the meaning
        Concept
           ▶   expresses stronger reference to semantics
           ▶   usually corresponds to a group of words that are highly related in
               content and have a content concept behind




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 126 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    An Introductory Example



3.1 An Introductory Example

        Text:
           ▶   The economy and society are currently undergoing the greatest
               upheaval since industrialization. The reason for this lies in the global
               availability of powerful and at the same time cost-effective information
               and communication technologies. The information age is becoming
               reality.
        Possible representation (set of words):




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 127 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stop Word Elimination



3.2 Stop Word Elimination


        Goal:
           ▶   ignoring terms that do not contribute to the ‘semantics’ of the
               documents
        Effects:
           ▶ reduction of storage space consumption
           ▶ thus also improving the performance of the matching algorithms
           ▶ improvement of recall and precision (e.g. in vector space model)

        Approaches to implementation:
           ▶   managing a stop word list
           ▶   elimination of high and low frequency terms




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 128 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stop Word Elimination



Stop word list English example (571 words):
a a’s able about above according accordingly across actually after
afterwards again against ain’t all allow allows almost alone along already
also although always am among amongst an and another any anybody
anyhow anyone anything anyway anyways anywhere apart appear
appreciate appropriate are aren’t around as aside ask asking associated at
available away awfully b be became because become becomes becoming
been before beforehand behind being believe below beside besides best
better between beyond both brief but by c c’mon c’s came can can’t
cannot cant cause causes certain certainly changes clearly co com come
comes concerning consequently consider considering contain containing
contains corresponding could couldn’t course currently d definitely
described despite did didn’t different do does doesn’t doing don’t done
down downwards during ...

       http://members.unine.ch/jacques.savoy/clef/englishST.txt

Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 129 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stop Word Elimination



Problems with stop word lists




        Creation and maintenance effort:
           ▶   but: there are comprehensive stop word lists for all common languages
        If necessary, adaptation to the domain:
           ▶   term ‘computer’ could be a useful stop word for computer science
               journals




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 130 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stop Word Elimination



Elimination of high and low frequency terms




        In a publication, Crouch suggests [Cro90]:
           ▶ not to consider terms that occur in less than 1% of all documents
             because they are too specific, and
           ▶ not to consider terms that occur in more than 10% of all documents

             because they are too general
        Requires existence of a representative document collection




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 131 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stop Word Elimination



Effect of document size
Example: chapters and verses of the New Testament of the Bible




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval           Lecture in summer semester 132 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



3.3 Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



        Inflection forms
           ▶   conjugation: go - went - gone
           ▶   declension: house - houses
        Same stem in different derivational forms
           ▶   “connect” is stem of “connected”, “connecting”, “connection”

Matching should refer to word stems
    ⇒ better recall




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 133 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Use within the scope of query processing




        Extension of the query, or
        General mapping of terms to the base or stem form




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 134 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Query extension


        All word forms are preserved in the query
        Query is extended by all conceivable word forms, e.g. by thesaurus or
        lexicon

        Advantage: information content of the query remains fully intact
        Disadvantage: query can become extensive
        ⇒ performance losses

Better is general mapping of terms to base and stem form




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 135 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Mapping to the base and stem form



Reduction to the base or stem form when converting queries/documents
to the respective representation
     Advantages:
           ▶ reduced number of terms to be managed
           ▶ ⇒ increased system performance
           ▶ tracing to base and stem form is easier than query expansion


Disadvantage:
specific search for word form becomes impossible ⇒ loss of precision




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 136 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Reduction to the base form



        Words ⇒ basic grammatical form
           ▶   nouns ⇒ nominative (subject) singular
           ▶   verbs ⇒ infinitive
        Procedure: removal of inflection endings and mapping to existing
        words

Example: applies ⇒ appl ⇒ apply




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 137 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Stem form reduction




        Traces words back to their stem
        Stem does not have to be a word
        Stem for verb and corresponding nouns is the same

Example: computer, compute, computation, computerization ⇒ comput




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 138 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Terms according to Kuhlen




Kuhlen [Kuh77] distinguishes three procedures for base and stem form
reduction:
        Basic lexicographic form
        Basic formal form
        Stem form




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 139 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Basic lexicographic form




        Form in which the word can be found in a dictionary
        Reversal of graphemic changes in the base form that may have
        occurred due to inflection




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 140 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Basic formal form




Basic formal form according to Kuhlen:
“... word fragments in which the “normal” English and foreign language
(mainly Latin) inflectional endings are removed without recoding the
resulting word fragments.”




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 141 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Stem form




Stem form according to Kuhlen:
        Strings created by deflection and removal of derivative endings
        Strings are to be unified by recoding as far as possible




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 142 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Formal, lexical base form and stem form by example




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 143 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Methods for base and stem form reduction


        Truncation
        Rules
        Dictionaries

Usage depends on language
        English: weak inflection ⇒ rules
        Italian: more inflected ⇒ many rules
        German: dictionaries




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 144 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Methods based on simple truncation
        Truncation explicitly in the query
        For example in form of regular expressions
           ▶   regular expressions in UNIX (according to [Gul88]), for example with
               grep:
     Meaning                                                                                      Expression
     Any single character                                                                               .(dot)
     Any string (even the empty one)                                                                           .∗
     Any repetition of the preceding character (even none)                                                      ∗
     Any repetition of the preceding character (at least 1)                                                    +
     0 or 1 repetition of the preceding character                                                               ?
     One of the characters from ...                                                                         [...]
     One of the characters from the range ...                                                          [a − e]
     One of the characters from the ranges ...                                                   [a − eh − x]
     All characters except ...                                                                          [ˆ . . . ]
     Escape symbol                                                                                              \
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 145 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Methods based on simple truncation




        Simple query with truncation:
        compute.* AND m[oui]{1,2}[sc]e

        Disadvantages:
           ▶   complex query formulation
           ▶   syntactic rules of natural language are not supported




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 146 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Un*x-Tool grep




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 147 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Lovins algorithm for basic form reduction



        Rule-based algorithm
        Suitable for texts in English
        Works in two steps
           ▶   removal of the endings
           ▶   transformation of the remaining endings
        Not best ending of the word is found
        But: consistency, i.e. same treatment of all words




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 148 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Procedure of the Lovins algorithm




        Removal of endings using the following table
        Cases
           ▶ A: no condition
           ▶ B: remaining stem has at least 3 characters
           ▶ C: remaining stem has at least 4 characters




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 149 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Removal of word endings




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 150 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Procedure of the Lovins algorithm




Further steps:

        If word ends with “s” and no “s” before it
        ⇒ Remove the “s”
           ▶   stems becomes stem
           ▶   but stress remains stress




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 151 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Procedure of the Lovins algorithm

Further steps:

        If word ends with “es”
        ⇒ Remove the final “s”
           ▶ places becomes place
           ▶ likes becomes like
           ▶ theses becomes these (Error!)
           ▶ indices becomes indice (Error!)
           ▶ syntheses becomes synthese (Error!)




Problem: Words of Greek origin with singular form “-is” (plural form
“-es”)



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 152 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Procedure of the Lovins algorithm




Further steps:

        Convert “-iev” to “-ief” and “-metr” to “-meter”
           ▶   believable becomes believ and then belief




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 153 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Procedure of the Lovins algorithm

Further steps:

        If word ends with “ing” and is preceded by more than one letter and
        no “th”
        ⇒ Delete “ing”
           ▶ thinking becomes think
           ▶ singing becomes sing
           ▶ sing becomes sing (no change)
           ▶ thing becomes thing (no change)
           ▶ preceding becomes preced (Error!, no word)


        Troubleshooting: If word after reduction ends with “et”, “ed”, “es”
        ⇒ Append “e”



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 154 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Procedure of the Lovins algorithm


Further steps:

        If word ends with “ed”, preceded by a consonant and preceded by at
        least 1 character
        ⇒ Delete “ed”
           ▶ ended becomes end
           ▶ red becomes red
           ▶ proceed becomes proceed
           ▶ proceeded becomes proceed




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 155 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Procedure of the Lovins algorithm




Further steps:

        If a word ends with bb, dd, ..., tt after removing the ending
        ⇒ Remove one of the duplicate characters
           ▶   embedded becomes embedd and then embed




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 156 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Procedure of the Lovins algorithm

Further steps:

        If word with more than 5 characters ends with “ion”
        ⇒ Remove “ion”
        If last character of stem consonant and preceding one vowel
        ⇒ Add “e”
           ▶ direction becomes direct
           ▶ polution becomes polute
           ▶ plantation becomes plantate (Error!)
           ▶ zion becomes zion
           ▶ scion becomes scion
           ▶ cation becomes cate (Error!, because cation is artificial word)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 157 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Lovins algorithm



Conclusion:

        English language needs about 10 to 20 rules
        Exceptions for irregular verbs necessary
        Rules should be applicable iteratively
           ▶   directions becomes direction becomes direct




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 158 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Consideration of prefixes

Prefixes should not be removed

        Example: although same Latin stem, prefixes express different
        semantics




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 159 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Other rule-based algorithms


        Porter’s algorithm [Por80]
           ▶ used very often
           ▶ same idea as Lovins algorithm
           ▶ but more complex rules
           ▶ e.g. in text search of PostgreSQL 8.4


        Further stemming algorithms available for English, such as Lancaster
        Stemming Algorithm
        Martin Porter’s project with ready algorithms and framework for
        self-development
           ▶   http://snowball.tartarus.org/




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 160 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Stem and/or Base Form Reduction



Methods based on dictionaries


        Rule-based methods only for weakly inflected languages like English
        For strongly inflected languages (German language)
        ⇒ dictionary
           ▶   inflection form → base form
                   ⋆   lief → laufen
                   ⋆   Häuser → Haus
           ▶   derivative form → base form
                   ⋆   Lieblosigkeit → lieblos
                   ⋆   Berechnung → rechnen


Problem: maintenance of the dictionary, technical vocabulary often
necessary



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 161 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Compound Word Identification



3.4 Compound Word Identification




        Search for “Bundeskanzlerwahl”

        Document, however, contains “die Wahl des Bundeskanzlers”
        What about document “... die Wahl des Bundeskanzlers fiel auf
        Saumagen mit Kraut ...”?




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 162 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Compound Word Identification



Approaches to compound words identification in German



        Ignoring the problem, i.e. only reduction to basic and stem form
           ▶ terms are for example “Wahl”, “Bundeskanzler” and
             “Bundeskanzlerwahl”
           ▶ problem: search for “Wahl” in document “Bundeskanzlerwahl” not

             successful
             ⇒ Recall suffers
        Decomposing compound words into components
           ▶   recall increases
           ▶   search for “Bundeskanzlerwahl” factually impossible




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 163 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Compound Word Identification



Approaches to compound words identification in English




        No compound words available
        ⇒ Words are already disassembled
           ▶   compound terms and phrases carry their own meaning
           ▶   e.g. “Information Retrieval” or “Artificial Intelligence”
               ⇒ Precision suffers




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 164 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Compound Word Identification



Identifying compound words in English




        1. Approach
           ▶ Compound word: words A and B with a maximum of n words in
             between
           ▶ Refinement: consideration of order and sentence boundaries
           ▶ Note: “college junior”, “junior college” and “junior in college” express

             completely different meanings




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 165 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Compound Word Identification



Identifying compound words in English



        2. Approach (Natural Language Processing)
           ▶   Parser determines grammatical sentence structure
           ▶   Problems:
                   ⋆ not all sentences conform to the grammar
                   ⋆ complex sentence forms
                   ⋆ slow algorithms



           ▶   Nevertheless, usable parsers exist, see for example in [Str94]




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 166 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Compound Word Identification



Weizenbaums ELIZA (1966)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 167 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Compound Word Identification



Compound words - Identification by the Darmstadt
indexing approach


Simple, robust method for identifying compound words [Lus86]
        Only for German (examples in English)
        Starting point is compound word dictionary
           ▶   obtained automatically by analysis of numerous texts
           ▶   long words were identified and then decomposed
        Analysis of the text
           ▶   occurrence of a component of a compound word
               ⇒ test if remaining component resides within maximum distance




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 168 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Compound Word Identification



Compound words - Identification by the Darmstadt
indexing approach

Criteria for describing a compound word:
    1   Spacing between components (all words, stop words only, or relevant
        words only)
    2   Order of components
    3   Components in the same sentence
    4   For each component: equality with respect to base form or stem form
⇒ Probability of syntactically correct identification of compound word can
be calculated

Experimental studies have shown that only the first and fourth of the
above characteristics significantly influence identification reliability


Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 169 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Compound Word Identification



Compound words - Identification by the Darmstadt
indexing approach

Identified components in the sample
text
        TUNNEL JUNCTION
        TUNNEL CURRENT
        ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY
        ALUMINIUM SUBSTRATES
        MEASURE ELECTRICAL
        FILM COEFFICIENT
The first three are correct, the rest
wrong



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 170 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Compound Word Identification



Terms and concepts


        Precombination:
        index language contains compound words, such as “cervical vertebra
        fracture” or “European single market”
        Precoordination:
        word linking while indexing for creating the representations, such as
        “cervical vertebra” + “fracture” ⇒ “cervical vertebra fracture”
        Postcoordination:
        word link formed during the search using Boolean or other operators,
        such as “Europe AND single market”




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 171 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



3.5 Terminological Control



        Comes from library systems
        Goal: avoids ambiguity by using “unambiguous” terms
        Manual indexing: two-step process
           1   recognizing the essence of a text to be retrieved
           2   reproduce these essences in an adequate form
        Usage of an artificial language with unique preferred naming




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 172 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Terminological control



Indexing language:
        Artificial language
        Serves to represent the essence of a text
        Descriptors: elements of the indexing language

        Terminology control: rules and activities that unambiguously define a
        descriptor and eliminate ambiguities and vagueness




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 173 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Synonym control



        Grouping of terms into equivalence classes
        Types of synonyms:
           ▶ spelling variants: ‘fiber’ and ‘fibre”
           ▶ different connotations, linguistic styles, areas of distribution:
             ‘nearsightedness’ and ‘myopia’, ‘gasoline’ and ‘petrol’ or ‘salt’ and
             ‘sodium chloride’
           ▶ quasi synonyms: ‘mist’ and ‘fog’ or ‘dive’ and ‘plunge’


        Descriptor (preferred term): ‘steed’, ‘mare’ and ‘nag’ ⇒ ‘horse’




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 174 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Synonym control



Use of thesauri
        Equivalence classes of synonyms and
        Terms with little or irrelevant differences in meaning
           ▶ different specificity: ‘philology’ and ‘linguistics’
           ▶ antonyms: ‘hard’ and ‘soft’
           ▶ special subterm: ‘winter wheat’ and ‘wheat’
           ▶ equating verb and noun: ‘participate’ and ‘participation’ (stemming)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 175 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



General Thesaurus




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 176 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Polysem control



Allocation of ambiguous terms to several equivalence classes

        Homographs: differentiation according to linguistic emphasis
        “sow” [s@U] - to plant seeds
        “sow” [saU] - a female pig
        Polysemy: differentiation according to the context
        “bank” - a financial institution
        “bank” - the margin of a river




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 177 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Morphological decomposition

Morphological decomposition: decomposition of compound words into
their word-forming elements, called morphemes
        ‘Abfallbeseitigung’ ⇒ ‘Abfall’ and ‘Beseitigung’
        ‘Krankenhausbibliothek’ ⇒ ‘Krankenhaus’ and ‘Bibliothek’

Sometimes decomposition does not make sense:
        ‘Eisenbahn’, ‘Handschuh’
Semantic decomposition: decomposition into conceptual units that
reproduce initial concept
        ‘Eisenbahn’ ⇒ ‘Schienenverkehr’ and ‘Überlandverkehr’
        ‘Handschuh’ ⇒ ‘Hand’ and ‘Bekleidung’



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 178 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Thesaurus



[Kom75] defines a thesaurus as follows:

A thesaurus is a natural-language-based documentation language that
aims to provide a reversibly unambiguous mapping of natural-language
terms and labels by exercising complete vocabulary control and
terminological control, and by representing terms and relations between
them through the representation of relations between labels and, where
appropriate, additional aids.




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 179 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Descriptor




Calvin Mooers introduced the concept of a descriptor in 1956:
        Representative of a word family or term
        Establishing the meaning by definition
        Validity only within one system




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 180 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Thesaurus relations



        Thesaurus relation: relation between words in a thesaurus
        Three basic types according to DIN 1643-1:
           1   equivalence relation: relations between real synonyms
           2   hierarchy relation:
                   1   abstraction relation (generic relation, e.g. ‘truck is a motor vehicle’)
                   2   composition relation (partitive relation, e.g. ‘a car consists of engine,
                       ...’)
           3   association relation: denote related terms, such as ‘SQL’ and
               ‘databases’




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 181 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Thesaurus relations


Relations to be managed in a thesaurus, if one does not want to
distinguish between abstraction and composition relations

                 Abbreviation                Meaning
                     TT                      top term (head term of a hierarchy)
                     BT                      superordinate term
                     NT                      subordinate term
                     RT                      related term (association relation)

B for broader, N for narrower, T for term




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 182 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Thesaurus relations


Division of the relations BT and NT, if one wants to distinguish between
abstraction and composition relation

               Abbreviation                Meaning
                  BTG                      generic term (abstraction relation)
                  NTG                      subterm (abstraction relation)
                  BTP                      association term (composition relation)
                  NTP                      partial term (composition relation)

B for broader, N for narrower, T for term, G for generalization, P for
participation




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 183 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Terminological Control



Use of a thesaurus in an IR system



        Query extension
        ⇒ higher recall value, worse precision value
        ⇒ should be optional for users
        Creation of document representation
        Use of the preferred terms
        ⇒ reduced memory requirements
        ⇒ higher recall value, possibly worse precision value




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval            Lecture in summer semester 184 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    A Language-independent Approach



3.6 A Language-independent Approach



        Problem with approaches to base and stem form reduction, to
        compound word consideration: dependence from certain language
        ⇒ new language requires adaptation
        Language-independent approach: n-grams
           ▶ trigrams (n = 3): Eisenbahn ⇒ eis, ise, sen, enb, nba, bah, ahn
           ▶ bigrams (n = 2): Eisenbahn ⇒ ei, is, se, en, nb, ba, ah, hn
           ▶ sometimes with word limit:

             Eisenbahn ⇒ #ei, is, se, en, nb, ba, ah, hn#




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 185 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    A Language-independent Approach



Evaluation of n-grams



        n-grams for indexing instead of words
        3 principal approaches to the vector space model
           1   words as terms (= dimensions of the vector space)
           2   stem forms as terms
           3   5-grams as terms
               Steps: Remove punctuation, convert to lowercase, map numbers to
               single characters




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 186 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    A Language-independent Approach



Evaluation of n-grams




        TREC Investigation:
           ▶   short queries ⇒ words and stem forms as terms better than 5-grams
           ▶   long queries ⇒ 5-grams better
        Problem: explanation of search result based on n-grams is impossible




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 187 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



3.7 Marking by means of Metadata




        Reducing the vagueness of natural language using metadata
        Special fields for documents such as for title, author, creation date
        Examples:
           ▶   Dublin Core
           ▶   Semantic Web




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 188 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



Dublin Core



        Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI): Founded in 1995 in Dublin,
        Ohio at workshop organized by Online Computer Library Center
        (OCLC) and the National Center for Supercomputing Applications
        (NCSA)
        Goal:
           ▶ development of a standardized metadata set for the description of
             digital documents
           ▶ commonly understood semantics and extensible
           ▶ creation of metadata by authors




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 189 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



Marking by means of metadata
        The core set of Dublin Core: 15 elements
        Elements are optional and can also be listed repeatedly




       https://guides.library.ucsc.edu/c.php?g=618773&p=4306386
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 190 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



Marking by means of metadata
  Language           The language(s) of the intellectual content of the resource
                     is/are noted here.
  Relation           The information in this field allows to show connections be-
                     tween different resources that have a formal relation to each
                     other, but exist as independent resources. Examples are im-
                     ages in a document, chapters of a book, or individual items
                     in a collection.
  Coverage           Here, information on spatial determination (e.g. geographic
                     coordinates) and temporal validity are entered, which char-
                     acterize the resource.
  Rights             Intended for the content of this element is a link (e.g., via
                     a URL) to a copyright notice, a rights management notice
                     about the legal terms, or possibly a link to a server that
                     dynamically generates such information.


Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 191 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



Marking by means of metadata

Specification, for example, in the head block of an HTML file:




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 192 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



Marking by means of metadata
Semantic Web


        Term “Semantic Web” by Tim Berners-Lee
        Goal: extend WWW to better capture document semantics through
        algorithms
        ⇒ better search, better document exchange

        Realization:
           ▶   content enrichment using machine-understandable metadata
           ▶   layer architecture
        Standardization by World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 193 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



Marking by means of metadata
Semantic Web




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 194 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



Marking by means of metadata
Semantic Web

        Unicode: standard with characters for many languages
        URI (Uniform Resource Identification): uniform addressing
        RDF (Resource Description Framework): representation of metadata
        based on XML
        Ontology:
           ▶   relationship/rules between individual elements
           ▶   W3C: OWL (Web Ontology Language)
        Logic: machine reasoning on metadata
        Trust and proof: establishing trustworthiness by means of signatures
        and encryption



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 195 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF model



        General language for metadata for WWW resources
        Resources: documents, images, any objects such as goods with price
        and availability
        Example: the website http: // ai1. inf. uni-bayreuth. de/ has
        an author whose name is Andreas Henrich
           ▶ URL for identifying a resource ⇒ Subject
           ▶ Author as property (attribute) ⇒ Predicate
           ▶ Andreas Henrich as attribute value ⇒ Object




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 196 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF model



Conversion of natural language statements into machine-understandable
format required:

        machine-understandable identifiers for subject, predicate and object
        machine-readable format for identifiers

⇒ Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 197 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)




        URL for web pages as subset of URI
        URI for unique identification of any objects
        RDF: URI for subject, predicate and object




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 198 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF model

        Example: the website http: // ai1. inf. uni-bayreuth. de/ has
        an author whose name is Andreas Henrich

        Components identified by URI
           ▶ Subject:
             http://ai1.inf.uni-bayreuth.de/
             ⇒ URL
           ▶ Predicate:

             http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/creator
             ⇒ Use of Dublin Core
           ▶ Object:

             http://ai1.inf.uni-bayreuth.de/mitarbeiter/henrich/
             ⇒ Homepage of Andreas Henrich



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 199 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF model as graph


RDF statements as nodes and edges of a graph
        node: subject or object
        named and directed edge: predicate




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 200 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF model as graph



        Collection of statements, such as
           ▶ Website http://ai1.inf.uni-bayreuth.de/ has author whose name is
             Andreas Henrich
           ▶ Website http://ai1.inf.uni-bayreuth.de/ has creation date with value

             1.10.2001
           ▶ Website http://ai1.inf.uni-bayreuth.de/ has a language value of

             German
        Common graph of nodes and edges




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 201 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF model as graph




        Value as literal and not as URI
        Object of a statement can be subject of another statement




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 202 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF model as graph




        Additional metadata is given for the author (street, city )
        Author is therefore simultaneously object of one statement and
        subject of the second statement


Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 203 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF/XML Syntax Specification




        RDF defines a syntax for mapping RDF graphs into XML
        Nodes and edges of an RDF graph are mapped to elements,
        attributes, element contents, and attribute values in XML
        URIs for properties
        Objects are mapped using namespaces




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 204 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF/XML Syntax Specification

Example:




        Predicate as element from Dublin Core model


Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 205 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF/XML Syntax Specification

Extension with locally defined vocabulary ex




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 206 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF Schema



        A type system can be created by means of RDF Schema (RDFS)
        Classes:
           ▶ similar to classes in object-oriented programming languages
           ▶ can represent any objects, such as web pages, people, document types,
             things, or even abstract concepts
           ▶ inheritance




        RDF Schema is created in RDF




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 207 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF Schema: Classes




In the following, three classes are defined in RDFS:
        Automobil: base class Automobil is derived from RDF Schema base
        class Resource
        Pkw : class Pkw is derived from class Automobil
        Sportwagen: the class Sportwagen in turn from class Pkw




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 208 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF Schema: Classes




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 209 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF Schema: Properties
Properties (predicates) for the individual classes can be defined as follows:




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 210 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF Schema



        Properties (predicate) as edge have input type (domain) and target
        type (range)
           ▶   input type:
                   ⋆   must be a class
           ▶   target type:
                   ⋆   can be a literal
                   ⋆   but also a class




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 211 / 543
                                      Vagueness in Language    Marking by means of Metadata



RDF Document




Here subject with rdf:ID instead of rdf:about ⇒ referencable via
    Relative URI:
    “#AndreasHenrichPKW”
    Absolute URI:
    “http://ai1.inf.uni-bayreuth.de/parkplatz/#AndreasHenrichPKW”
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)            Lecture Information Retrieval         Lecture in summer semester 212 / 543
