                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation




      4. Simple IR Models and their Implementation




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 213 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation



Outline



    1   Pattern Matching
    2   Word Search
    3   Boolean Retrieval
    4   Coordination Level Match
    5   Extended Boolean
    6   Fuzzy Set Model




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 214 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation



IR model



Implicit as well as explicit aspects:
     Assumptions, for example:
           ▶   no matter if word occurs once or ten times in the document
           ▶   independence of individual index terms
        Representation of documents and queries
        Retrieval function
           ▶   calculation of relevance score for a query and a document
           ▶   approximation of the relevance probability




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 215 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Pattern Matching



4.1 Pattern Matching


        Very simple IR model
        Submodel of some IR models
        Task: search for a string (search pattern) in longer text
        Realization:
           ▶ compare sequentially search pattern of length m from left to right with
             the text of length n to be searched
             ⇒ O(m ∗ n)
           ▶ better algorithms: Boyer-Moore-Horspool-Sunday algorithm,

             Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm
             ⇒ O(n)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval      Lecture in summer semester 216 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



4.2 Word Search




        Very simple IR model
        Task:
           ▶   given: word W
           ▶   result: all documents containing W
        possible extension: use stem or base form reduction




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 217 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Word set




Extension to word set {W1 , ..., Wk }
        Search for documents containing all given words
        Implicit AND combination over the searched words
        First step to Boolean retrieval




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 218 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Difference to pattern matching




        No test whether given pattern or search word is contained in one text,
        but determination of set of documents containing search word
        ⇒ extension to word sets
        Search word must appear in the document as a word




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 219 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Implementation approaches for word search



        Pattern matching algorithm on each document and subsequent test
        for word
           ▶   problem: search effort grows linearly with the size of the document
               collection
        Create index structure in advance
           ▶   inverted lists
           ▶   signatures




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 220 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Inverted lists
For each word a sorted list of documents containing this word is managed




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 221 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Word search: search word




Search for all documents that contain exactly the search word
        Scanning through the inverted list for the given search word




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 222 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Word search: same stem




        Search for occurrences with the same stem:
           1   form stem for search word
           2   create temporary list set: all lists for words whose stem is identical to
               the stem of the search word
           3   form union of the document IDs of the lists
           4   documents of the union set form the result of the query




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 223 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Word search: same stem



        Efficient determination of the union set over multiple lists using
        sorting of the lists by document IDs
           ▶   lists are scanned in parallel
           ▶   exploiting the sorting:
                   1   initialize all lists to the first element
                   2   smallest current element gets into result list
                   3   lists with smallest current element are set to next element
                   4   if there are still elements in total
                       ⇒ step 2




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 224 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Word search: by word set


        Intersection of affected lists
        Lists are scanned in parallel
        Exploiting the sorting of the lists
           1   initialize all lists to the first element
           2   all current elements the same
               ⇒ transfer to results list
           3   all current elements not equal
               ⇒ lists with smallest element are set to next element
           4   if there are still elements in total
               ⇒ step 2




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 225 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Implementation of inverted lists


Required storage space:
    Example TREC collection
           ▶ contains article from Financial Times
           ▶ size of the document collection is 564 MB
           ▶ collection contains 210,158 articles, each of which has an average of

             about 150 different words
           ▶ assumption: 4 bytes per document ID

             ⇒ 210,158 * 150 * 4 bytes = 126,094,800 bytes = 120 MB
           ▶ disregarded: terms themselves, administrative data, frequency of

             occurrence, location
           ▶ conclusion: index can quickly reach 20% of the document collection

             ⇒ background storage




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 226 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Zipf’s law



Observations while counting words in texts:
        A few words occur very frequently
        English texts:
           ▶ the two most frequently occurring words represent 10% of all
             occurrences
           ▶ the six most frequent words represent 20% of all occurrences

           ▶ the fifty most frequent words represent 50% of all occurrences


        Very many words occur very rarely




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 227 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Zipf’s Law: Brown and Lob




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 228 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Zipf’s law

        Sort words by frequency of occurrence
        ⇒ product of rank number and frequency of occurrence is constant
        (Zipf’s Law)
           ▶ most common word about 7 million times
           ▶ second most common word about 3.5 million times
           ▶ third most common word about 2.3 million times

        Formal:
           ▶ representative text corpus C
           ▶ W (C ) is the set of words that occur in C
           ▶ h(w ) is frequency of which a word w ∈ W (C ) occurs in the corpus
           ▶ let r (w ) denote the rank of w ∈ W (C ) when the words are sorted by

             decreasing frequency
           ▶ then: r (w ) ∗ h(w ) ≈ c(constant), ∀w ∈ W (C )




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 229 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Zipf’s Law




                                                                              Example from Wikipedia

Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 230 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Zipf’s Law and inverted lists



Conclusion:
        Few long lists
        despite removal of stop words
        Many short lists
        despite removal of very rare words (Crouch)
        Search structure needed to map words to corresponding list
        ⇒ e.g. B-tree or digital trees




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 231 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



B + -tree




        Known from lecture database technology
           ▶   application in databases and file systems
        Balanced tree
        Storage of data sorted by keys
        Leaf nodes contain data




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 232 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Inverted list management


        Persistent management on background storage
        Management in blocks/pages
           ▶ 1:1 mapping between lists and pages not useful due to variability of list
             lengths
           ▶ several small lists on one page
           ▶ large lists across multiple pages

        Multilevel addressing of a list
           1   file identifier
           2   block number in file
           3   start address in block (additionally length)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 233 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Inverted list management




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 234 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Signatures


        Alternative to inverted lists
        Hash mapping l-character word w1 w2 ...wl to signature
        (bit string of fixed length F )
        Efficient comparison operations on signatures
        Example hash mapping:




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 235 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Signature properties




        Hash function h usually maps large domain to small range (filter)
        h(word1 ) = h(word2 ) with word1 ̸= word2 (collision) is possible, i.e.
        different words get same hash value
        Operations on signatures are therefore not exact




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 236 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Signature file idea



        Signature file as inexact filter
        Check necessary condition for document to contain word
        Inexact ⇒ although fulfilling the condition, document does not always
        contain word (false alarm)
        False alarms must be filtered out afterwards
        But: post-filter on relatively few documents




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 237 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation                  Word Search



Signature file: architecture

                                                              Query




                                                                           Query



                                        Hash function


                             Query signature                                   Due to False Alarms
                                                            Preselection
                                                            of document
                                                            identifiers
                                  Signature matching 1---------i.i            String matching   1------i► Resu lt




                                               Signatures                              Selected
                                                                                       documents




                                      Signatures                                   Texts




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)                 Lecture Information Retrieval                          Lecture in summer semester 238 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Motivation for signatures




        Pattern matching
           ▶   all documents must always be scanned
        Signatures
           ▶ signature comparison faster than pattern matching
           ▶ candidate selection
           ▶ pattern matching on smaller set of documents




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 239 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Overlaying signatures



Superimposed Coding:
        Mapping of 1 word to 1 signature consisting of F bits with m
        (signature   weight) bits set
             F
               
        ⇒ m      different signatures possible
        Signatures of several words are bitwise by OR combined ⇒ block
        signature
        ⇒ Fewer signatures per document




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 240 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Block signature: example



F=12, m=4




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 241 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Hash function



Problem: hash value should generate m set bits per word in bitcode of
length F
        Use more than m hash functions with mapping to [1...F ]
        Results indicate position of the set bits
        Equal positions possible
        ⇒ use of the m first different positions




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 242 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Hash function


        i-th hash function with mapping to [0...F − 1]
        Argument: l-character word w1 w2 ...wl
        i-th prime number pi




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 243 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Parameters for superimposed coding




        Signature length F
        Signature weight m
        Overlay factor D:
        number of word signatures per block signature




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 244 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Logical blocks




        Documents are divided into logical blocks (and a rest block)
        A logical block contains exactly D different words to be indexed
        Each logical block has a block signature
        Result: multiple block signatures for one document




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 245 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Search for documents



Search for documents containing word w
        Calculation of word signature Sw for word w
        Bitwise AND combination of Sw with each block signature Sbi of the
        signature file
        If Sw = Sw ∧ Sbi , then corresponding document is in candidate set
        Removal of false alarms from candidate set using pattern matching




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 246 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Conjunctive query


        Several search words combined with AND
        ⇒ OR combination the signatures of the search words of the query
        ⇒ Only documents found where all query words are within one block




        Query “Information Retrieval” (101) would not find the document




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 247 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Conjunctive query




        Alternative:
           ▶   determine candidate set for each query word
           ▶   before pattern matching ⇒ set intersection
        Advantage: procedure works always
           ▶   How to proceed with OR combination?




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 248 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



False Alarms



        Can occur with signature files
        This means:
           ▶   block or its block signature fulfills necessary condition
           ▶   the pattern to be searched for is not contained in the block or the
               document represented
        Reasons:
           ▶   hash function can map different words to identical signature
           ▶   by overlaying the signatures




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 249 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



False alarms
False alarms = necessary condition fulfilled \ block contains pattern




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 250 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



False alarms: example




        Example:
           ▶   let: F = 12, m = 3 and D = 3
           ▶   query ‘text’ AND ‘search’




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 251 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



False alarms: example




                                                                         Candidates are the first 3 text
                                                                         blocks

                                                                         2nd block is false alarm


Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval      Lecture in summer semester 252 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Minimize the number of false alarms




        Right choice of design parameters F , m and D
        Goals:
           ▶   minimal storage space for signatures
           ▶   minimal probability of false alarms
        ⇒ conflicting goals




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 253 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Error probability Fd



        Probability that signature or block signature condition is met, but
        represented document does not contain the pattern to be searched for
        Formal definition using probability:
           ▶   Fd = P (search pattern not in block ∧ signature fulfills condition)
        Assumptions:
           ▶   query consists of one word
           ▶   equal distribution of signatures




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 254 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Calculation of the error probability
        m
        F : probability that a bit of a word signature is set
        (1 − m   D
              F ) : probability that bit in block signature is not set (overlay
        due to D)
        1 − (1 − m  D
                 F ) : probability that bit in block signature is set
        (1 − (1 − m  D m
                  F ) ) : probability that block signature matches query
        (m bits set must match; candidate set)
        If all candidates are false alarms (very pessimistic), then
        Fd = (1 − (1 − m    D m
                          F) )
        F increases ⇒ Fd decreases monotonically
        D increases ⇒ Fd increases monotonically
        m increases ⇒ Fd can decrease or increase
        ⇒ minimization finds best value m for given values F and D


Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 255 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Optimization for m


        For large D, formula for Fd can be approximated by exponential
        distribution:
                                                                       mD
                                                Fd = (1 − e − F )m
        From this, the optimal value for m is obtained by derivation and
        transformation as:
                                                     mopt = F ∗ln2
                                                              D
        Insert into the formula to calculate the probability of error:
                                                                     F ∗ln2
                                                     Fd = ( 12 ) D
        Use of mopt ⇒ number of ones is 50%




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 256 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Practical application of the probability of error



        Storage space calculation:
           ▶ word consists of cw characters on average
           ▶ character requires 8 bit
           ▶ let Y be the total number of words in all documents

           ▶ storage space requirement for documents: SD = Y ∗ cw ∗ 8bit
           ▶ storage space requirement for signatures: S = Y ∗ F bit
                                                        S       D
           ▶ we put both values in a ratio α: S = α ∗ S
                                               S         D
           ▶ thus: F = α ∗ c ∗ 8
                   D         w




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 257 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Practical application of the probability of error




        Example α = 0.1 and cw = 10
             F
             D = 8, for instance F = 80 and D = 10
           ▶
           ▶ F = 2.14%
              d
        Example α = 0.2 and cw = 10
             F
             D = 16, for instance F = 80 and D = 5
           ▶
           ▶ F = 0.0459%
              d




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 258 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Storage structures for signature files




        Three alternatives:
           ▶ sequential signature files
           ▶ bit slice organization
           ▶ S-tree




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 259 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Sequential signature files


        Signature file for N blocks is a bit matrix with F columns and N rows
        Most simple storage: sequential storage of the individual rows of the
        matrix
        ⇒ SSF (Sequential Signature File)
        After each signature reference to document
        Alternative: all references in separate file, because only some
        references have to be read

        Search effort grows linearly with document collection size
        Files may fit into main memory




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 260 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Sequential signature files




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 261 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Bit slice organization




        SSF: block signatures are read completely
        Actually only columns needed where query signature bits are set
        Idea BSSF (Bit-Sliced Signature Files):
           ▶   each column in separate file ⇒ F files (bit slice)
           ▶   per query (one search word) m bit slices must be read




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 262 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Bit slice organization: structure




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 263 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Bit slice organization: example




                                                                              Block is false alarm

                                                                              Block no candidate

Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 264 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Bit slice organization: evaluation




        Advantage over SSF: not all bits have to be checked
        Disadvantage: update operations require F disk accesses




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 265 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



S-tree



        Horizontal division of the N × F bit matrix
        Similar to B-tree
        Structure:
           ▶ each node has a maximum of k entries
           ▶ entry: signature and address
           ▶ inner nodes: address refers to child in tree
           ▶ leaf: address refers to document/block




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 266 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



S-Tree: overlay




        Signature of an inner node is OR combination of child signatures
        Problem: nodes near the root can contain many ‘ones’




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 267 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



S-tree: structure (k = 4)




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 268 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Search in S-tree



        Start at the root
        Traverse all children for which AND match with query signature
        successful
        Multiple search paths possible

        Example: query signature 01000 00000 generates traverse of N1, N2,
        N3, N6, N8, D12, D27, D31, D07




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 269 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Insertion into S-Tree



        Navigate to the leaf via nodes that would need minimal expansion
        Overflow:
           ▶ splitting the leaf
           ▶ generate two “seed signatures”, which should be maximally different
             (effort O(k 2 ))
           ▶ fast heuristics for finding seed signatures:

             search for the signatures whose bits are furthest to the left or right
           ▶ then alternately assign most similar signature to each seed signature




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 270 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Insertion into S-Tree




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 271 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



S-Tree: conclusion




        Advantage: search effort grows only sublinear to the size of the
        document collection
        Disadvantage: nodes near the root often have a lot of set bits
        ⇒ only few nodes can be omitted from search




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 272 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Word Search



Comparison of signature storage structures



Profile indicates importance of operations

                                                           Profile
           Structure
                                Search              Insert    Delete           Storage
           Sequential           rare                dominant rare              important
           Bit slices           dominant            rare      rare             less important
           S-tree               (little)            much      much             less important




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval   Lecture in summer semester 273 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Boolean Retrieval



4.3 Boolean Retrieval

        Boolean expressions over search words




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval       Lecture in summer semester 274 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Boolean Retrieval



Document representation


        Document as word set (possibly after stop word elimination and/or
        stem form reduction)
        Variants:
           ▶ multiset instead of set
             ⇒ storage of the frequency of occurrence
           ▶ set of (word, occurrence location) pairs
           ▶ location of occurrence:

                   ⋆   for example in the title, heading or text
                   ⋆   alternatively word position in the text (sentence number, word number)
                       ⇒ useful for NEAR queries




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval       Lecture in summer semester 275 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Boolean Retrieval



Query representation



        Information need is formulated as a Boolean expression
        Words in a word set are implicitly combined with OR or AND
        Examples:
           ▶ ‘eagle bear’ ⇒ ‘eagle’ AND ‘bear’
           ▶ ‘eagle’ AND (‘bear’ OR ‘lion’)
           ▶ ‘eagle’ AND NOT ‘lion’
           ▶ BUT operator instead of AND NOT




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval       Lecture in summer semester 276 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Boolean Retrieval



Implementation



Variants:
        Pattern matching
        very inefficient for large document collections
        Signatures
        well suited for AND combinations (but only blockwise)
        Inverted list
        most versatile option




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval       Lecture in summer semester 277 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Boolean Retrieval



Implementation with inverted lists
Simple (one search word) query




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval       Lecture in summer semester 278 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Boolean Retrieval



Combined queries



        AND combination
           ▶   intersection of the lists (using sorting for efficiency)
        OR combination
           ▶   union
        Unary negation q = NOT q2
           ▶   usually very large result, binary variant is better
        Binary negation q = q1 AND NOT q2
           ▶   complementary set




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval       Lecture in summer semester 279 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Boolean Retrieval



Other operations




        ti NEAR[k]tj
           ▶ term ti must not be further than k words away from term tj
           ▶ requires occurrence position in inverted list
           ▶ scan through lists in parallel and test possible pairs

        IN TITLE
           ▶   word appears in the title




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval       Lecture in summer semester 280 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Boolean Retrieval



Boolean Retrieval: summary



Problems:
        In simplest form no reduction to basic and stem form
        No weighting of words by location or frequency
        No decomposition of compound terms
        Hardly predictable size of the result set
        No ranking of the results
        User must be proficient in Boolean logic




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval       Lecture in summer semester 281 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Coordination Level Match



4.4 Coordination Level Match



Motivation:
        Example query of Boolean retrieval:
        ‘House AND Garden AND Italy’
        Problem: documents with 2 word matches do not appear, just like
        documents with 0 or 1 match
        Goal: if no document with 3 word matches
        ⇒ documents with 2 matches as result




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester 282 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Coordination Level Match



Coordination level match


Query consists of
        Terms that should occur and
        Terms that should not occur
Example: ‘House, Garden, NOT France’

Retrieval function sums up values (ranking):
        Desired term in the document: +1
        Undesired term in the document: -1
Example document: ‘Garden in France’ ⇒ 0




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester 283 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Coordination Level Match



Implementation



        Using inverted lists
        Utilization of sorted lists
        Parallel scanning through the lists and addition of the values
        Ignore the documents with values less than or equal to 0
        Display of result documents sorted by value
        Effort: O(n ∗ m) with n for number of documents and m for number
        of lists to be scanned




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester 284 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Coordination Level Match



Inverted lists
Query: “Cost, Motorcycle, NOT Production”




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval          Lecture in summer semester 285 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Extended Boolean



4.5 Extended Boolean




        Boolean retrieval leads to low user satisfaction
        ‘Softening’ of the strict set semantics by partial matching
        Weighting of the occurrence of individual terms and the query terms




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval      Lecture in summer semester 286 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Extended Boolean



Extended Boolean retrieval



        E.g. Waller/Kraft (1979)
           ▶   Parameterized junctor

                                             t1 ∧ / ∨ ... ∧ / ∨ tn
                               (1 − γ) ∗ min(wt1 , ..., wtn ) + γ ∗ max(wt1 , ..., wtn )

           ▶   Conjunction characteristic: 0 ≤ γ ≤ 0.5
           ▶   Disjunction characteristic: 0.5 ≤ γ ≤ 1




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval      Lecture in summer semester 287 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Extended Boolean



Extended Boolean with weights


        xi ∈ [0, 1] is i-th similarity value with respect to search term ti and
        document dj
        E.g. p-norm model (Salton et al.; 1983)

                         qor = t1 ∨p ... ∨p tn                      qand = t1 ∧p ... ∧p tn
                                                                    Pn           p    1
                                                                        i=1 (xi )
                                          sim(qor , dj ) = (              n          )p
                                                                       Pn            p        1
                                                                          i=1 (1−xi )
                                      sim(qand , dj ) = 1 − (                  n            )p

                                                      1≤p≤∞



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval               Lecture in summer semester 288 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Extended Boolean



Properties p-norm



        p=1
                                                                                 Pn
                                                                                  i=1 xi
                                sim(qor , dj ) = sim(qand , dj ) = (               n       )
        p=∞

                                            sim(qor , dj ) = max(xi )
                                            sim(qand , dj ) = min(xi )




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval      Lecture in summer semester 289 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Fuzzy Set Model



4.6 Fuzzy Set Model


        Idea: application of fuzzy set theory (Zadeh) as retrieval model
        Boolean retrieval: term contained or not in document
        Problem: Boolean values are too sharp
        Example: document with term ‘SQL’ is semantically related to term
        ‘database’
        Approach: term-to-document association as membership value from
        [0, 1], where 1 or 0 means maximum or minimum membership,
        respectively




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 290 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Fuzzy Set Model



Fuzzy set



A fuzzy set S over a population G is described by function µS : G → [0, 1],
which gives the degree of membership to S for each element from G

Combination (operations proposed by Zadeh):
        Negation: µ¬S (u) = 1 − µS (u)
        Disjunction: µA∪B (u) = max(µA (u), µB (u))
        Conjunction: µA∩B (u) = min(µA (u), µB (u))




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 291 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Fuzzy Set Model



Representation of the query/documents




        Query analogous to Boolean retrieval
        Document Dj : µi (Dj ) for all terms ti of the vocabulary
        Retrieval function: Zadeh operations




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 292 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Fuzzy Set Model



Representation of the query/documents: example

        Vocabulary: t1 =‘House’, t2 =‘Garden’, t3 =‘Italy’, t4 =‘France’
        Query: ‘House AND (Italy OR France) AND NOT Garden’
        Retrieval function:
        min(min(µ1 (Dj ), max(µ3 (Dj ), µ4 (Dj ))), 1 − µ2 (Dj ))




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 293 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Fuzzy Set Model



Determination of the membership values


Approach of Ogawa, Morita, Kobayashi [OMK91]
        Calculation via term-to-term matrix [ci,l ]
        ci,l is correlation between terms ti and tl
                      n
        ci,l = ni +ni,l
                    l −ni,l



        nl is number of documents that contain tl
        ni,l is number of documents containing ti and tl
        ci,l = 1 holds for i = l




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 294 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Fuzzy Set Model



Determination of the membership values



Example
        Term ‘house’ in 7 documents
        Term ‘roof’ in 6 documents
        Both together in 5 documents
        ni = 7, nl = 6, ni,l = 5 ⇒ ci,l = 85




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 295 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Fuzzy Set Model



Determination of the membership values

Calculation of term-to-document membership from term-to-term matrix
                       Q
µi (Dj ) = 1 −                 (1 − ci,l )
                      tl ∈Dj


        Replace 1 − x by ¬x and x ∗ y by x ∧ y and apply De Morgan’s laws
        and double negation rule

        ⇒ µi (Dj ) = ∨ ci,l
                           tl ∈Dj


        Term-to-term values of the document are factually disjunctively
        combined



Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 296 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Fuzzy Set Model



Implementation




Usage of inverted lists
        List for term ti contains documents Dj with µi (Dj ) > 0
        Another problem: long lists
        shorter lists by using threshold value




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 297 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Fuzzy Set Model



Evaluation fuzzy set model


        Advantages
           ▶   support of the vagueness of the language by term correlations
           ▶   ranking
        Disadvantages
           ▶ dominance of Zadeh operations min/max
           ▶ complex Boolean query formulation
           ▶ performance problems due to long lists
           ▶ term-to-term matrix on dynamic document collection

             (better on representative data set)
           ▶ alternative: term correlation from thesaurus




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 298 / 543
                 Simple IR Models and their Implementation    Fuzzy Set Model



Dominance problem of the Zadeh operations



        Query: ‘House AND Italy’

                                             Term            D1       D2
                                             House           0.3      0.9
                                             Italy           0.3      0.2
                                             Query           0.3      0.2

        System considers D1 more relevant than D2




Prof. Dr.-Ing. Ingo Schmitt (BTUCS)           Lecture Information Retrieval     Lecture in summer semester 299 / 543
