                                               Database and Information Systems Group
                                               Module: Information Retrieval




                        Task Sheet 4
Signature Files, Extended Boolean Retrieval, Fuzzy Set Model

  1. Explain the idea of using signatures in an IR system! What are the advantages or
     disadvantages of this technique?
  2. Describe the method of bit slice organization for the management of signatures. What
     advantages does this have in comparison to sequential signature files?
  3. What is superimposed coding and how can it lead to false drops when using signatures?
  4. Given the S-tree below, explain the search for the dataset 0001011110!




  5. Explain the procedure of adding a new dataset into an S-tree!
  6. Explain the coordination level match retrieval model and give advantages and disadvantages
     in comparison to the Boolean model.
  7. Name the main advantages of the p-norm retrieval model over the traditional Boolean model.
  8. What is the role of the choice of the p parameter in the p-norm model and how does the
     parameter affect the query results?
  9. How does the fuzzy set model differ from the Boolean retrieval model? How do disjunction,
     conjunction and negation work in the fuzzy set model?




                                              1
10. You are given an IR system that uses the fuzzy set model. The document collection contains
    four documents D1-D4, with the content being:
    D1: Cottbus is the only city in Lusatia with a basketball team.
    D2: The city of Cottbus ist crazy for Basketball.
    D3: Basketball is not important in Senftenberg.
    D4: Senftenberg and Cottbus are in Lusatia.
    Now assume that after a conversion into lowercase, stop word elimination and stemming
    we have a vocabulary with the terms {cottbus, city, lusatia, basketball, team, senftenberg}.
    Determine first the term×term correlation matrix for the vocabulary. Then use it to calculate
    the membership values µi, j for all documents D j to all terms ti .
11. Using the membership values calculated in task 10, determine the fuzzy sets for the
    following queries:
       • Q1 : Senftenberg ∧ Cottbus ∧ Lusatia
       • Q2 : (Senftenberg ∨ Cottbus) ∧ ¬Basketball
       • Q3 : Senftenberg ∨ Lusatia ∨ city




                                              2
